Let's welcome our next speaker, Sebastian Steck.
So hello, also from me a warm welcome to the Legal and Policy Issue Staff Room.
Let's start right away.
Today I would like to talk about GPL's termination from the point of view of German law.
You might first wonder what do I mean by termination?
So if someone, the licensee violates the GPL, there are some consequences for the licensee
which happens automatically and there are other consequences which need some more manual
action by the copyright holder.
I will frame this as manual termination.
So I would, in this talk, call both mechanisms termination.
So even though most strictly you could say only the manual termination is really termination
and the automatic part is something else like conditions or scope of copyright permissions
or something like that.
And in German law, as you might already know, we have a lot of precedents.
Thanks for Ralf Welte and Thier Jäger.
And in my opinion, the best summary is this relatively recent decision of the upper district
court of Ham and they say, according to the well anonymous opinion in case law and the
at least predominant opinion in the literature, the distribution of software license under
the new general public license in breach of the license conditions constitutes a copyright
infringement.
So the assances here, if someone violates the GPL, the copyright holder has the remedies
for copyright infringement at hand.
And the predominant remedy used in copy left enforcement is here, of course, to get an
injunction.
So the copyright holder could get an injunction that the defendant may not distribute.
The copyright holder's work or else if the licensee should dare to do it any way, the
licensee will be fined or jailed.
So but Harald Welte did not ask for a plain injunction about any distribution.
So it was a very clever piece of lawyering in my opinion of Thier Jäger to say, well,
we had a phrase unless accompanied with the materials that GPL required.
So to be more precise, they had spelled out what the materials that GPL requires are exactly
R.
So and why did they do that?
You could easily imagine to ask the court to get an injunction against distribution
in any matter.
So and the point here is the main defense of a defendant of a copyright injunction is
say, well, but I have a license.
You can't get a license.
Forbidding me behavior, the license allows me to do.
And this leads right to the point, what is this future distributions?
The due past violations caused the licensee to lose their right to make future distributions
and distributions of course have to be compliant on their own.
So in particular, a company with the materials that GPL required.
So up to my knowledge, no court had ever to decide whether the second alternative is actually
viable and allowed.
But there was somehow a backdoor or detour how this question slipped into some of the
lawsuits Harald Wertefeld and it was basically the licensee argued, well, this termination
clause is so strict that's unfair.
It's an unfair term of adhesion and it should thus be regarded as void.
So there would be no termination at all.
So and the courts rejected the argument, this for example is from the ruling of the
very first court ruling on the GPL in Germany.
And they said the violator can reacquire the rights by acceptance of and obeying the conditions.
So the courts had the opinion that even a past violator could make lawful copies in
the future by obeying the GPL in the future.
So it would not have been viable to try to get an injunction in the second way.
Nonetheless, in my opinion, but as I already said, this is not yet tested in court, it
is possible to get an injunction of the second nature if you take the copyright holder takes
the right preparatory steps.
So but you might first ask is it really reasonable to try to go that route or should we just
stick with the first alternative.
And the problem or the potential problem here is you may not fit any GPL violation into
unless accompanied with the materials that GPL require.
So you may imagine that I want to be violator says, well, our schemas, we put all the documents
we need together with the binary, the license tax, the warranty disclaimer and a perfect
offer for source.
But it's only perfect to the letter if someone later asked, they just ignore them.
So it may be the case that such conduct cannot be bear it by an injunction and following
the first alternative.
So I would argue in the following what could a copyright holder do to have the second
option available.
And then at the end of the day, at least, with the first law students, you would have
you would go both routes in the alternative and then see what the courts actually say.
So let's look back at section four of the GPL version two.
That's the so-called termination clause.
Here we see the second sentence, which basically says that any attempt to make use of the licensed
work, which is against the license, will automatically terminates the rights of under
this license.
So the FSF had already come to the conclusion that if you read this word by word in a very
harsh way, you could say, well, that means once more mistakes and all your rights are
gone.
So since they realized that that is impractical, in practice, they made another termination
clause in GPL version three, which is basically a manual termination.
So to summarize that under GPL version three, the copyright holder has to first send a warning
letter and then wait some time and then they can send basically the termination notice,
even though the GPL version three does not use these words, but I would frame it using
these words.
So by the conclusion that such terms would be impractical and even unjust was also made
by the German legislator.
And for this reason, they introduced this section into the civil code, which basically
says if there should be a contract which says that if one party violates the contract, they
lose all their rights, such provision should be instead read as a right to rescind in the
event that a party should violate the contract.
So we have now informed us what does the rescission actually or more precisely mean under German
law.
And rescission in layman's terms means the rescinding party sends a rescission notice
and then the contract has to be unwinding.
So more precisely here, the civil code says that the performances received must be returned
and the benefits derived must be surrendered in the event of a rescission.
And to get really the essence of what does this mean, we will have to look into a specialty
of German law and that's first the so-called separation principle.
So the separation principle says that every, every day's transaction, like for example,
a regular contract of sale splits itself up into multiple contracts.
You have first the contract of obligation which solely creates the obligations.
For example, in the contract of sale, it only creates the obligation on the seller to deliver
the goods and on the buyer to pay the money and take the goods.
And then to actually transfer the title when the goods are transferred, you have to enter
into a second contract, a so-called disposition contract.
And you may guess it, to transfer the money you need a third contract, another disposition
contract usually.
So and the consequence of the separation principle is the so-called abstraction principle which
says if an obligation or the complete obligating contract gets void, this does not automatically
void the disposing contracts, meaning that the goods are not transferred automatically
back, the money is not transferred automatically back, the rights are not transferred automatically
back, the title is not transferred automatically back and so on.
So in a contract of sale, this means that they have to take, the buyer and the seller
have to take extra steps to actually transfer the rights, the titles back.
So translated to the GPL, this would mean if the copyright holder resents the GPL,
this would only turn the obligating contract into a new contract requiring those parties
to give back what they had previously received.
But strictly formally speaking, the rights still stay where they are, they only have to
be given back.
This may be a technical formality, I would argue it basically is, we will see later how
you can handle that.
But I think you should be aware that the rights stay first where they are.
So let us now look a little bit more into detail what recession means or what do you
have to do for a recession.
So you may wonder what is the warning I have told right at the beginning and this is the
section closest to giving us an answer, do you need to sign the warning letter before
we can do a recession notice.
And this section is more precisely on statutory or decision rights.
So what we have talked before was contractual recession rights, read into the determination
clause.
So this section does not apply directly but nonetheless in my opinion this emphasised the
underlying principle that you should send a warning notice or you must send a warning
notice very unreasonable and fair and so on.
So I would just recommend send a warning notice and then you are on the safe side.
To summarize what we have seen up to now, there is at least another German law, no automatic
termination of the GPL.
That means current or past violations do not void automatically future distribution rights,
of course future distribution which is compliant.
But nonetheless a violation is still a copyright infringement because the permissions are only
granted under conditions that the GPL is abate.
In US terms you would say there is a scope of the license and if the licensee acts outside
of the scope you can get an injunction saying no you may not act outside of the scope, you
may not violate the conditions.
So if you have a case as a copyright holder, if you see a device for example which is violating
and you can say that there is a violating from just opening the box and see what is in
there, you have a clear violation, I would recommend you strongly to go that route if
it is well paved, there is lots of precedent and I would add one remark here, you can get
a preliminary injunction in such cases.
A preliminary injunctions are very favourable for the copyright holder under German law,
for example they do not have to provide a deposit and the only drawback of a preliminary
injunction is one that you have to be quick and be sure that it will prevail because else
you would owe damages.
So if you have a clear violation I would recommend go to the lawyer right away and then the lawyer
will send a warning letter giving the violator one or two weeks to solve the problem and
if the problem is not solved go to the court and ask for an injunction because the court
will reject the preliminary injunction if you have waited too long and that is if you
have waited more than roughly a month from knowing the violation.
So and I may add here this is what Harold Welter did at least what he later did he also
wrote that when he wrote on his own to violators he was just ignored so it was basically it
was not only a waste of time and his own resources but it also would have written of getting a
preliminary injunction so I was strongly argued there is no point to be that friendly in a
clear case to say well we sent a warning without lawyer first so that you don't have to pay
the lawyer for writing the warning.
So but on the other hand there may cases well the copyright holder has to manually terminate
the GPL and it's not so the scholars do not all agree whether this theory what I've presented
is actually the right theory some others say well you have to do something which we could
translate as cancellation or termination so but in the end you should set a deadline for
cure in any way so send a warning in any way so no matter what legal theory actually would
prevail you should send a warning and just say here is the warning if you don't fix the
problem we will take further measures so and then if the problem is not solved the copyright
holder can send in this case a decision notice it may be a cancellation notice or whatever
so and here is one more important detail I wrote here partly a decision notice so you
may have wondered what happens was the past distribution if the copyright holder resents
the license have they be somehow unwinding and even though it's rarely mentioned in the
civil code it's clear amongst scholars that you can have a partly decision if that's reasonable
for example with the GPL you can say the copyright holder can say I resent for all your future
permissions so that you can meaningfully give me these permissions back and I let the contract
as is the GPL as is for all past distributions so if there were for example an obligation to
provide source code this obligation would still be intact so and if you follow other
theories like you need a cancellation you then have to send a cancellation notice or whatever
so I think it would be relatively easy to formulate it well enough that you can fit the
notice now your rights are terminated into any legal framework which might apply so and if
rescission is the right framework you have then demand the permissions back before you can get
an instruction not to use this granted back permissions but at the latest when you're at
this step you should really get a lawyer so and then the lawyer will just write into to
complain a we want to have an injunction on the conditions and if that doesn't work you want to
have in the alternative our rights back if they needed to be given back first and then we want
also an injunction against any distribution so that's basically what I would say a copyright
you're doing such situations so before we come to questions let me make two more remarks first
you may have copyrights or money or something else you feel is valuable for copy left enforcement
and then your best address you can go to a software freedom conservancy so here are Bradley and
Karen and I and I'm sure they are happy to help you with this but you are also able to happy
yourself if you want to just assign your copyrights go to as of conservancy or assignment or if you
have some money to give visit as of conservancy org slash donate or you can also become a
sustainer and give them regularly money so and the second remark is so here is the disclaimer
for the legal talk and the disclaimer may be surprisingly I have given no legal advice you
may have not noticed it but the trick here is according to the German legal services act
legal advice is only advice given in a specific individualized situation so it is allowed to
everyone to discuss the general situation to discuss about some hypotheticals so during
Q&A I strongly ask you to not bother me with your specific personal problems I'm happy to have
general discussions about all this with you and I'm happy to discuss about hypotheticals but that's
it so thank you for your talk and I think it's great that you bring up this last slide because
now I can sneak in a little remark on the previous panel because I think the solution to all the
problems that we have discussed earlier is fairly easy and maybe it's time for us as an open source
community to start demanding that the ownership of the source code is with people like SF
Conservancy and other non-profit organizations yeah like I must I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm a no I'm a
cybersecurity consultant so I do horrible horrible work in my like what I'm paid for I'm a very
unethical person in my day job but I don't write code and I especially don't write proprietary
code and if I did I would donate it to Conservancy because I think that will actually solve the
problem of for-profit companies monopolizing software so sorry I don't have a question on
your talk but that was just too good an opportunity I did not ask either of them to promote us and
we really appreciate it it's a little it's a little embarrassing but much appreciated I actually
have a real question on your talk it's a really excellent analysis I'm curious if you looked at
the other side of the question because some of the I guess they're called stat I don't we would
call them statutes in the US that you were quoting they seem to also relate to this I'm sure you're
familiar with Till Ligger's theory that you can receive a new license once you come into compliance
merely by downloading the software again and it's it seemed like some of the things you were
quoting there hinted at why he has that analysis because I never fully understood his analysis but
some of your your some of your points seem to fit with that and it made a lot more sense to be
hearing it from you so I think that the relevant sort you have to have here is what is the disposing
contract of the copyright holder to transfer the right through the licensee and depending on how
you would frame that you could say they would give it on an ongoing daily basis or you could say
they give it up front or they could say they give it up front and additionally an offer to give it
to you again if you should violate and depending on how you frame that you would end up with
different things you would have to give back so so I was by intent vaguely about that because I
know there are different theories what this what is actually transferred and so what have to be
actually giving back but but in my point of in my point of view the essence is there is a decision
right which would provide the obligation to give back what they still have no matter what it actually
is yeah I'm from Germany I know all these things actually I met hard welcome until yeah and I can
tell everybody that at least one of the companies he's you'd learned from this but the question is
can you also give us insights on the situation in the US because I know there is something called
the simple where case maybe Karen could tell us something about this and as far as I remember
that in this situation the the copyright holder of the GPL license of the clearly stated on the
website that certain companies permanently are banned from using their software I don't know
exactly how the situation is I can say enough for sure that illegal systems different different
are strongly different in in these questions and these kind of edge cases so I knew that there is
theory under us Lord that the rights of her men play avoid I knew on the other hand that there is
theory you can get a new license by downloading it but at the end of the day it will have to be
tested in court yeah so I got curious about two things you're right in the about German law that
you mentioned so as far as I understand one German court said that you can reacquire
automatically rights under the GPL because you just go again to the website and download code and
I could you maybe elaborate why the court says so because if it worked then you could actually
constantly could violate I could elaborate on that and so sorry and just the second question is
it under German law that the license has I don't know the German terms for that but I understand
that in civil law you have contracts that have only this obligatory effect and the real effect of
transfer of let's say property rights so do I understand correctly that licenses in German law
have this real effect of transferring actually any rights okay so to your second question first
this goes basically back to the separation principle and how you would understand the term
license in the in on the background of German law you could say the license is only the disposing
contract with the real effect or you could understand the term licensing it also includes
the basically more contract obligating contract thing creating the obligations so well I assume
even the term wordlet sense is not used strongly for the foreboding of for those things and to
to the problem of what happens if a violator violates again and again or can they do that or
can they not do that so I think if the violation is unnoticed or at least unactioned by any copyright
holder they can violate again and again which would be each violation again copyright infringements
but if nobody stops them then nobody stops them of course and on the other hand there is precedent
which then lead to amendment of the civil code that no party of a contract can be forced to be
trapped into a contract forever if the other party constantly does not apply to the contract so
so no matter how which legal theory you actually apply or how you would actually frame it in my
opinion you could always go back to this historic ruling and say well but a copyright holder cannot
be trapped into TPL needing to tolerate violations forever
thanks really interesting talk you already briefly mentioned us or the previous question was
about the US am I correct in thinking that this will be not the same but similar in other European
countries or am I wrong on that I don't know exactly enough the law of the other European
countries to get to be able to give a precise answer but I would guess it's more like the
German way for the countries which had to Roman tradition that's basically the non-English speaking
countries and the English speaking countries have to have the British tradition basically and
these have done other rules okay let's thanks a question